Title: What Real World Problem Theoretical Science Aims to Solve?
Date: 2016-11-25
Status: draft

Recently, I had a conversation with a colleague which gradually led us to
the topic of – is there a real world problem theoretical science aims to
solve? The colleague said that theoretical science doesn’t address any real
world problem and research (in the general sense) is the only thing it’s
busy with. Despite the fact I agree with the statement that theoretical
science is used to conduct research (though I’ll introduce an alternative
term for this activity soon), I couldn’t agree with the colleague
completely. I insisted that there is a real world problem all theoretical
sciences are addressing. In the end, I was asked the question “What is the
‘real world problem’ that theoretical physics aims to solve?” My answer was
“exploration and exploitation.” I’m not sure I managed to convince the
colleague, but the topic seemed interesting for me, and I decided to express
it as a blog post.

Those who have had a mathematical optimization course and have some insights
into optimization algorithms, probably, have a hunch why I picked up
“exploration and exploitation” as the answer. Anyway, let me explain my idea
in more detail.

## Hill Climbing

I would like to introduce an example that can be found in many books about
optimization theory which explains the so called gradient descent or climb
method. Imagine you are standing on a hilly landscape. Your goal is to climb
to the highest hill, but it’s a dark night and all you have is a flashlight,
so you can’t see further than a few feet in front of you. What would your
strategy be? Most likely you would try to find the direction along which the
elevation increases the most and go there. After a while you would look
around again and find the direction in which you would move a bit further.
You would continue this procedure until you reach a place from where you can
only go down whichever direction you choose. At this point you could say you
have reached the highest hill in the local area. This is what exploitation
is about – you start from a random point and try to improve the position
step-by-step. Easy!

The thing is, the highest hill in some area is not necessarily the highest
hill on the landscape. Sometimes you need to go a little bit down first to
reach a peak in the future. In other words, a chain of the locally best
decisions does not necessarily lead to the best outcome. You don’t want to
get stuck on a ten foot hill when Everest is nearby, and here exploration
comes into play. Though some people can happily stay on a hill they have
found, there are always “rangers” who thirst to know what lies beyond the
border of the realm traced out by the flashlight. These guys are willing to
go down the hill in the hope of finding a higher one. Don’t you think this
process perfectly matches with what my colleague called “research?”

## The Big Picture

Now let’s extend this idea to the whole civilization. In the very beginning,
mankind stood at some point in this highly bizarre world landscape. As an
analogy, a higher hill on this landscape means a higher quality of life,
e.g. more goods, better food, less routine work, etc. It’s obvious that many
early discoveries such as fire and the wheel were made by accident. People
moved in random directions and sometimes found these hills. We had to
perform random small walks because we didn’t have a flashlight and weren’t
brave enough to go in an unknown direction.

Back to the real world problem for theoretical physics. The real world
problem that theoretical physics aims to solve can be called exploration (or
research) and exploitation. Scholars explore the land of physics trying to
find something that can be useful, whether in the present or in the future –
points which look promising to start the climbing process from. They also
draw maps of the visited places, so their successors can reach the frontier
easily. I believe, each startup, lab, the whole civilization aims to solve
the same problem in a certain sense.

Everything mankind does is trying to find “hills” on the real-world
“surface” in which we can produce maximum value. At the same time,
theoretical science supplies us with good starting points and educated
guesses of the direction we should move from there – in other words serves
us as a flashlight. The first is achieved with exploration and the second
with exploitation.

Hope you don't get bored with this explanation :)
