Title: Why Hiring the Ideal Candidate May Not Be the Best Option
Date: 2016-12-20

Hiring is a hard task. If you have tried it at least once, you will probably
agree with me. We write a vacancy description, trying to dump as many skills
and qualifications there as we can. Looking for a back-end developer? No
problem! Let’s say the candidate we are looking for should be proficient with
Python, Django, databases, Java, caching, DevOps, JavaScript, OOP… what else?
Oh, yes! It would be nice if he or she knows NoSQL, distributed computations,
functional programming, and how to cook pizza! Needless to say, most likely
you won’t be able to apply all these skills to the problem you’re aiming to
solve, but even if you will able to find someone with qualifications that
perfectly match with your requirements, think again – it may be a trap!

![It's a trap!](/images/its-a-trap.jpg)

If you are willing to hire someone, then, most likely, you have a project you
need some help with. Your assumption is – a person experienced with the
technologies which are in use in the project will be more likely to help to
hit the deadline and deliver a high quality product. You interview a dozen
applicants and finally find someone who, as you think, fits the project
perfectly. In other words, you find the ideal candidate. Now you fall into
the temptation to send him or her an offer immediately. My recommendation is
– don’t do that right away!

## 1,000 Pizzas Contest 

The reason is good knowledge
of a technology stack sometimes can be beaten by the drive of a person who is
less proficient, but willing to learn. Let’s say, the deliverable of your
project is the cooking of one thousand pizzas (we hired the back-end
developer who knows how to cook them, remember?). Now imagine you have two
guys – one who used to be a pizzaiolo and another one who has a clue about
how to cook pizza, but has no or very little experience in it. During the
first week the first guy’s performance is pretty high and the quality of
pizza he cooks is very good too. The poor second guy can hardly cook one
pizza, all of his other attempts ended up in a bin. Honestly, there were not
many attempts, because he was too busy trying to figure out how the oven
works and which ingredients are to be used for different kinds of pizza.

A month later, when you are ready to fire the second guy, you amusedly
discover that his performance has graded up to the performance of the
professional pizzaiolo. Now you decide to give this guy a chance. And your
decision is right, because another month later he’s twice as efficient as the
first guy. A few weeks after that this amateur pizzaiolo invents a new type
of pizza which sells extremely well and makes you pizza restaurant famous. At
this point you fire the first guy. 

## What Can We Learn from This? 

The situation I’ve just described is idealized, but I hope you understand
what I mean. When hiring someone, don’t be blinded by his or her ideal CV and
skill set. Ask yourself, does the person who sits in front of you have
potential? Maybe you can afford to have low performance at the start in favor
of future opportunities. Mathematically speaking, it’s better to choose
someone whose performance and expertise grow as an exponential function
rather than one whose performance is linear.

![Pizza Contest Graph](/images/pizza-contest.png)

The world is a complex and unpredictable thing. Pursuing the illusion of
control, we often become short-sighted, caring only about today, focused on
solving a short-term problem, and ignoring what may happen tomorrow. Don’t be
afraid to leave your comfort zone when hiring team members. Respect your team
and give them the freedom to create. Acting on this, you can win a jackpot.

P.S. The guy who invented the new kind of pizza for you left your company one
year later and opened his own pizza restaurant across the street. But that’s
another story.
